Modify rule S3529: Adapt to LaYC (#2629)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S3529/cfamily/rule.adoc

> Accessing a block of the memory that was already freed has undefined behavior.
> This rule flag access via pointer or references to released heap memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessing a memory block that was already freed is undefined behavior.
This rule flags access via pointer or references to released heap memory.
```

== Why is this an issue?

> A program may allocate an additional block of memory, using the `malloc` function.
> When no longer needed such blocks of memory are released using the `free` function.
> Reading or writing to a heap allocator memory after it was released leads to undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
A program may allocate an additional memory block using the `malloc` function.
When no longer needed, such memory blocks are released using the `free` function.
After it is released, reading or writing to a heap-allocated memory block leads to undefined behavior.
```

[source,c]
----
char *cp = malloc(sizeof(char)*10); // memory is allocated
// all bytes in cp can be used here
free(cp); // memory is released
cp[9] = 0; // Noncompliant: memory is used after it was released
----

In addition to the `malloc` and `free` pair, in `C++` a heap memory may be acquired by use of the operator `new`,
and later released using the operator `delete`.

[source,cpp]
----
int *intArray = new int[20]; // memory is allocated
// elements of intArray can be written or read here
delete[] intArray; // memory is released
intArray[3] = 10; // Noncompliant: memory is used after it was released
----

> Releasing a memory block by invoking `free` or operator `delete`,
> indicates the memory management system that the given block is no longer used by the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Releasing a memory block by invoking `free` or operator `delete`,
informs the memory management system that the given block is no longer in use by the program.
```

> Depending on the state and load of the program, such block can be then:

Reviewer: Missing new line between "...then:" and * causes list not to render on my end.

>  * reused, i.e., the same pointer is returned by allocation function,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * reused, i.e., the same pointer is returned by the allocation function,
```

 * released to the operating system, making it inaccessible to the program.

=== What is the potential impact?

Accessing a released memory causes undefined behavior.
This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this has a wide range of effects:

* The program may crash due to the memory no longer being accessible,
  or due to unexpected value being read or written via the pointer.

> * Reading from the released memory may produce a garbage value,
>   or in the case when such memory was already reused to store sensitive data, such as passwords,
>   may lead to a vulnerability that uses such a defect to extract information from an instance of the program.

Reviewer: I would separate the two
```suggestion
* Reading from the released memory may produce a garbage value.
* When such memory was already reused to store sensitive data, such as passwords, it may lead to a vulnerability that uses such a defect to extract information from an instance of the program.
```

* Writing to released memory, may change the value of the unrelated object in a remote part of the code if the memory was reused by it.

>   As different objects may reuse same block of memory between runs, this leads to unintuitive and hard diagnose bugs in programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  As different objects may reuse same the block of memory between runs, this leads to unintuitive and hard diagnose bugs in programs.
```

== How to fix it

In most situations, the use of an uninitialized object is a strong indication of a defect in the code,
and fixing it requires a review of the object allocation and deallocation strategies.

> Generally, fixing the issues requires adjusting the allocation code, so either:
> 
> * Moving accesses to memory before the deallocation
> * Moving the deallocation so it happens after all the uses

Reviewer 2: Here in the preambule you are speaking about "allocation code", but in both bullet points you are only mentioning the "deallocation"
```suggestion
Generally, fixing the issues requires adjusting the allocation code, so either:

* Moving accesses to memory before the deallocation
* Moving the deallocation so it happens after all the uses
```

Author: I just remove the workd allocation from the sentence before the list. Now it says "adjusting the code, so either".

If possible, it is desired to remove manual memory allocations,
and replace them with stack-allocated object, or in case of {cpp},
a stack object that manages memory (that uses RAII idiom).

=== Noncompliant code example

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int *intArray = malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
// ...
free(intArray);
intArray[9] = 0;  // Noncompliant
----

=== Compliant solution

Releasing memory after all of its uses.

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int *intArray = malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
free(intArray);
----

Alternatively, if the size of the array is known at compile-time:

[source,c]
----
int intArray[10];
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
----

In {cpp}, `std::vector` can be used with an arbitrally number of elements:

[source,cpp]
----
std::vector<int> intArray;
// ...

> intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant

Reviewer 2: This does not mention that you've preallocated vector to hold at least 10 elements, so if the `// ...` does not resize the vector, this "compliant solution" will crash

Author: Good catch. I added line with resize.

----

=== Going the extra mile

> In {cpp}, using manually allocating and deallocating memory is considered a code smell.

Reviewer: Either
```suggestion
In {cpp}, manually allocating and deallocating memory is considered a code smell.
```
Or
```suggestion
In {cpp}, using manual memory management is considered a code smell.
```

It is recommended to follow an _RAII_ idiom and create a class, that manages the memory by allocating it in the constructor and freeing it in the destructor.
Such an object can be then passed between the functions (either as an argument or by being returned) instead of raw pointers.
Passing such object by value guarantees that the heap memory remains accessible when accessed via the object.

[source,cpp]
----
std::vector<int> intArray; // manages array on heap
std::unique_ptr<Class> objPtr = std::make_unique<Class>(); // manages object on heap

intArray[5]; // OK
objPtr->foo(); // OK
----

However, any raw pointers or references to memory held by such object may still lead to a use after free:
[source,cpp]
----
int* p1 = &intArray[0];    // becomes dangling when intArray is destroyed
int* p2 = intArray.data(); // same as above
Class* p3 = objPtr.get();  // becomes dangling, when objPtr releases the pointer
----

> 

Reviewer: Maybe specify smart pointers release & move for such cases when transfer to out of scope of heap allocated memory is required?

Author: Could you elaborate a bit more. I was thinking mostly about cases, where you escape raw poitner to object owner by unique_ptr, and then use it after unique_ptr was destroyed.

Author: I rewrote this section based on Arseniy suggestion. Could you please check if that address you concerns?

Reviewer: Yep, is does address it

Accessing a memory block that was already freed is undefined behavior.
This rule flags access via pointer or references to released heap memory.

== Why is this an issue?

A program may allocate an additional memory block using the `malloc` function.
When no longer needed, such memory blocks are released using the `free` function.
After it is released, reading or writing to a heap-allocated memory block leads to undefined behavior.

[source,c]
----
char *cp = malloc(sizeof(char)*10); // memory is allocated
// all bytes in cp can be used here
free(cp); // memory is released
cp[9] = 0; // Noncompliant: memory is used after it was released
----

> In addition to the `malloc` and `free` pair, in `C++` a heap memory may be acquired by use of the operator `new`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the `malloc` and `free` pair, in {cpp} a heap memory may be acquired by use of the operator `new`,
```

and later released using the operator `delete`.

[source,cpp]
----
int *intArray = new int[20]; // memory is allocated
// elements of intArray can be written or read here
delete[] intArray; // memory is released
intArray[3] = 10; // Noncompliant: memory is used after it was released
----

> Releasing a memory block by invoking `free` or operator `delete`,
> informs the memory management system that the given block is no longer in use by the program.

Reviewer 2: Comma between the subject and the verb breaks the sentence
```suggestion
Releasing a memory block by invoking `free` or operator `delete`
informs the memory management system that the given block is no longer in use by the program.
```

=== What is the potential impact?

Accessing a released memory causes undefined behavior.
This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this has a wide range of effects:

* The program may crash due to the memory no longer being accessible,
  or due to unexpected value being read or written via the pointer.
* Reading from the released memory may produce a garbage value.
* When such memory was already reused to store sensitive data, such as passwords, it may lead to a vulnerability that uses such a defect to extract information from an instance of the program.
* Writing to released memory, may change the value of the unrelated object in a remote part of the code if the memory was reused by it.
  As different objects may reuse same the block of memory between runs, this leads to unintuitive and hard diagnose bugs in programs.

== How to fix it

In most situations, the use of an uninitialized object is a strong indication of a defect in the code,
and fixing it requires a review of the object allocation and deallocation strategies.
Generally, fixing the issues requires adjusting the code, so either:

> * Moving accesses to memory before the deallocation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Moving accesses to the memory before the deallocation
```

* Moving the deallocation so it happens after all the uses

If possible, it is desired to remove manual memory allocations,
and replace them with stack-allocated objects, or in case of {cpp},
a stack object that manages memory (that uses RAII idiom).

> === Noncompliant code example

Reviewer 2: This and "Compliant solution" should be nested under "Code examples" subsection

Author: Thanks. Good catch.

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int *intArray = malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
// ...
free(intArray);
intArray[9] = 0;  // Noncompliant
----

=== Compliant solution

Releasing memory after all of its uses.

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int *intArray = malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
free(intArray);
----

Alternatively, if the size of the array is known at compile-time:

[source,c]
----
int intArray[10];
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
----

In {cpp}, `std::vector` can be used with an arbitrally number of elements:

[source,cpp]
----
std::vector<int> intArray;

> intArray.resize(10);

Author: I went for resizing, because there is huge difference in meaning between:
```
std::vector<int> intArray(10); // 10 elements,
std::vector<int> intArray{10}; // 1 element
```
And I didn't want this rule to go into that trap, and potentially confuse someone. Which would defeat the point of this being better.

> intArray.resize(10);

Author: So, I went for something that is unambigous.

After it is released, reading or writing to a heap-allocated memory block leads to undefined behavior.

[source,c]
----
char *cp = (char*)malloc(sizeof(char)*10); // memory is allocated
// all bytes in cp can be used here
free(cp); // memory is released
cp[9] = 0; // Noncompliant: memory is used after it was released
----

In addition to the `malloc` and `free` pair, in {cpp} a heap memory may be acquired by use of the operator `new`,
and later released using the operator `delete`.

[source,cpp]
----
int *intArray = new int[20]; // memory is allocated
// elements of intArray can be written or read here
delete[] intArray; // memory is released
intArray[3] = 10; // Noncompliant: memory is used after it was released
----

Releasing a memory block by invoking `free` or operator `delete`
informs the memory management system that the given block is no longer in use by the program.
Depending on the state and load of the program, such block can be then:

 * reused, i.e., the same pointer is returned by the allocation function,
 * released to the operating system, making it inaccessible to the program.

=== What is the potential impact?

> Accessing a released memory causes undefined behavior.

Reviewer 2: "computer memory" is uncountable.
"memory" that is countable is "remembering",
e.g.,  I have good memorie**s** of my vacation trip. (countable) vs. My memory is good. (uncountable)
```suggestion
Accessing released memory causes undefined behavior.
```

This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this has a wide range of effects:

* The program may crash due to the memory no longer being accessible,
  or due to unexpected value being read or written via the pointer.
* Reading from the released memory may produce a garbage value.

> * When such memory was already reused to store sensitive data, such as passwords, it may lead to a vulnerability that uses such a defect to extract information from an instance of the program.

Reviewer 2: stylistic - avoids repeating word "such" in the sentence
```suggestion
* When the memory was already reused to store sensitive data, such as passwords, it may lead to a vulnerability that uses this defect to extract information from an instance of the program.
```

> * Writing to released memory, may change the value of the unrelated object in a remote part of the code if the memory was reused by it.

Reviewer 2: Comma between subject and verb breaks the sentence
```suggestion
* Writing to released memory may change the value of the unrelated object in a remote part of the code if the memory was reused by it.
```

>   As different objects may reuse same the block of memory between runs, this leads to unintuitive and hard diagnose bugs in programs.

Reviewer 2: IMO, it is obvious that we are only talking about bugs in programs and no other kinds of bugs
```suggestion
  As different objects may reuse same the block of memory between runs, this leads to unintuitive and hard diagnose bugs.
```

== How to fix it

In most situations, the use of an uninitialized object is a strong indication of a defect in the code,
and fixing it requires a review of the object allocation and deallocation strategies.

> Generally, fixing the issues requires adjusting the code, so either:

Reviewer 2: Stylistic, to avoid 3 subsequent gerunds ("fixing -> adjusting -> moving")
```suggestion
Generally, the fix requires adjusting the code, so either:
```

* Moving accesses to the memory before the deallocation
* Moving the deallocation so it happens after all the uses

> If possible, it is desired to remove manual memory allocations,
> and replace them with stack-allocated objects, or in case of {cpp},
> a stack object that manages memory (that uses RAII idiom).

Reviewer 2: Here the plurality of "stack-allocated objects"/"stack object" does not match (last two subjects are "object" vs "objects").

How about this?
```suggestion
If possible, it is desired to remove manual memory allocation,
and replace them with stack-allocated objects, or in case of {cpp},
stack objects that manage memory (that uses RAII idiom).
```

=== Code examples

=== Noncompliant code example

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int *intArray = (int*)malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
// ...
free(intArray);
intArray[9] = 0;  // Noncompliant
----

=== Compliant solution

> Releasing memory after all of its uses.

Reviewer 2: Subjective. IMO, an imperative is more straightforward than a description
```suggestion
Release the memory after all of its uses.
```

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int *intArray = (int*)malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
free(intArray);
----

> Alternatively, if the size of the array is known at compile-time:

Reviewer 2: Since you give the description of the previous solution "release the memory", why not summarize this one?
```suggestion
Alternatively, allocate the array on the stack,
if the size of the array is known at compile-time:
```

[source,c]
----
int intArray[10];
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
----

> In {cpp}, `std::vector` can be used with an arbitrally number of elements:

Reviewer 2: If we go with imperative
```suggestion
In {cpp}, use `std::vector` with an arbitrary number of elements:
```
Or, at least fix the typo
```suggestion
In {cpp}, `std::vector` can be used with an arbitrary number of elements:
```

[source,cpp]
----
std::vector<int> intArray;
intArray.resize(10);
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
----

=== Going the extra mile

In {cpp}, manually allocating and deallocating memory is considered a code smell.

> It is recommended to follow an _RAII_ idiom and create a class, that manages the memory by allocating it in the constructor and freeing it in the destructor.

Reviewer 2: Depending on how you pronounce RAII, it may require "a" or "an" for indefinite article. At the same time, isn't it a single relatively well-known idiom? Let's use the definite article
Also, no need for comma before "that"
```suggestion
It is recommended to follow the _RAII_ idiom and create a class that manages the memory by allocating it in its constructor and freeing it in its destructor.
```

> Such an object can be then passed between the functions (either as an argument or by being returned) instead of raw pointers.

Reviewer 2: I did not see the "functions" mentioned before, so they can't be used with a definite article
```suggestion
Such an object can be then passed between functions (either as an argument or by being returned) instead of raw pointers.
```

Author: "the RAII" sounds good.

> Passing such object by value guarantees that the heap memory remains accessible when accessed via the object.

Reviewer 2: This one, to be honest, is not clear.
As you only mentioned allocating in a constructor and deallocating in a destructor,
what happens to the memory and the pointer to it when you pass the object by value?
Will it be reallocated on each copy? Will it be shared like with a `shared_ptr`?
The first thing I imagined when reading this sentence is that it will segfault when I copy the pointer by passing the object by value, the original deallocates the memory, and the copy dereferences its pointer.

Author: Indeed that is cryptic. I will try to rewrite this and the previous sentence, to provide more context.

Author: I rewrote the section based on your suggestion. Could you please take a look.

[source,cpp]
----

> std::vector<int> intArray; // manages array on heap

Reviewer 2: You don't have to follow English rules in a comment, but if you can afford it, why not
```suggestion
std::vector<int> intArray; // manages an array on the heap
```

> std::vector<int> intArray; // manages array on heap

Reviewer 2: Here again, the code as it stands will result in a crash because you allocate the vector of 0 size and access the 6-th element three lines below

Author: Good catch. Updated, and used a constructor with adjusted comment.

> std::unique_ptr<Class> objPtr = std::make_unique<Class>(); // manages object on heap

Reviewer 2: You don't have to follow English rules in a comment, but if you can afford it, why not
```suggestion
std::unique_ptr<Class> objPtr = std::make_unique<Class>(); // manages an object on the heap
```

intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
free(intArray);
----

Alternatively, allocate the array on the stack,
if the size of the array is known at compile-time:

[source,c]
----
int intArray[10];
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
----

In {cpp}, use `std::vector` with an arbitrary number of elements:

[source,cpp]
----
std::vector<int> intArray;
intArray.resize(10);
// ...
intArray[9] = 0;  // Compliant
----

=== Going the extra mile

In {cpp}, manually allocating and deallocating memory is considered a code smell.
It is recommended to follow the _RAII_ idiom and create a class that manages the memory by allocating it when the object is constructed and freeing it when it is destroyed.
Furthermore, copy and move operations on such objects are designed such that this object can be passed by value between functions (either as an argument or by being returned)
in place of raw pointers.
Depending on the type, passing an _RAII_ object operations may either allocate a new block of memory and copy the elements (`std::vector`),
transfer ownership of the memory to constructed object (`std::unique_ptr`), or shared ownership and free memory when the last object is destroyed (`std::shared_ptr`).

> This guarantees that accessing a memory managed by such an object is not released as long as such an object is not modified or destroyed (some _RAII_ types provide a stronger guarantee).

Author: Thanks, for suggestion.

Practically this has a wide range of effects:

* The program may crash due to the memory no longer being accessible,
  or due to unexpected value being read or written via the pointer.
* Reading from the released memory may produce a garbage value.
* When the memory was already reused to store sensitive data, such as passwords, it may lead to a vulnerability that uses this defect to extract information from an instance of the program.
* Writing to released memory may change the value of the unrelated object in a remote part of the code if the memory was reused by it.
  As different objects may reuse same the block of memory between runs, this leads to unintuitive and hard diagnose bugs.

== How to fix it

In most situations, the use of an uninitialized object is a strong indication of a defect in the code,
and fixing it requires a review of the object allocation and deallocation strategies.
Generally, the fix requires adjusting the code, so either:

* Moving accesses to the memory before the deallocation
* Moving the deallocation so it happens after all the uses

If possible, it is desired to remove manual memory allocation,

> and replace them with stack-allocated objects, or in case of {cpp},

Reviewer 2: Sorry, when suggesting a fix, I missed "them".
In fact, you could shorten this part:
```suggestion
and use stack-allocated objects, or in the case of {cpp},
```
or more conservatively
```suggestion
and replace it with stack-allocated objects, or in the case of {cpp},
```

* Moving the deallocation so it happens after all the uses

If possible, it is desired to remove manual memory allocation,
and replace it with stack-allocated objects, or in the case of {cpp},

> stack objects that manage memory (that uses RAII idiom).

Reviewer 2: Sorry, another missing place for the fix to be complete ("that uses" can't refer to "stack objects").
```suggestion
stack objects that manage memory (using RAII idiom).
```
